README.md, before:

# ⚡ ModBus (unofficial) Espressif support for power meters

This repo details how to use a [Saola-1 ESP32S2 board](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32s2/hw-reference/esp32s2/user-guide-saola-1-v1.2.html) coupled with [a RS485 transceiver from
LinkSprite][linksprite_rs485_shield] and connect it to Espressif's IoT cloud platform: [RainMaker][rainmaker].

Also, there's support for [PVoutput.org][pvoutput] graphs since my meter
is coupled to three 500W solar panels (one per phase) equipped with APC
microinverters.

![power_meter_front](./img/yigedianqi_power_meter_front.png)
![supported_power_meters](./img/menuconfig_power_meters.png)

There are several branches, all of them with custom setups that work
with PlatformIO IDE with varying degrees of success:

## 🎋 Branches

* master: FreeModbus from ESP-IDF framework with PVoutput.org and RainMaker support.
* emodbus: [eModbus][emodbus] with Arduino, first time I got the Modbus holding registers listed thanks to [this eModbus discussion thread][emodbus_hardware_discussion].
* arduino-rainmaker: Same as emodbus, but trying to mix in RainMaker,
ultimately switching to ESP-IDF (on `master`) after realising that
[Arduino support for RainMaker has some rough edges at the time of
writing this](https://esp32.com/viewtopic.php?f=41&t=26552).

## 🤖 Hardware setup

The hardware setup is very similar to [this eModbus hardware example thread][emodbus_hardware_example] with a couple of notable differences:

1) The use of a [ttl level converter][ttl_level_converter] between the
[`MAX481CSA` RS485 (5V level)][MAX481] transceiver and the Espressif board (which is 3.3V level).
2) RE/DE circuitry is handled by the LinkSprite shield instead of [via
software with `REDEPIN`][redepin]. This is because [the shield has a
transistor-based automatic switching between transmitting and
receiving][auto_rede], see the schematic in
[docs/linksprite_shield_datasheet.pdf][linksprite_rs485_shield_schematic]

Here's a picture at some of the hardware specs from the power meter:

![power_meter_specs](./img/yigedianqi_power_meter_specs.png)

## 🖥️ Code structure

Don't forget to clone it like this, otherwise the RainMaker submodules
will not be pulled and the code will not compile:

```
git clone --recursive
https://github.com/brainstorm/esp-modbus-power-meter/
```

[When and if Espressif merges my RainMaker power metering PR, I'll
repoint those submodules away from my
fork][espressif_rainmaker_powermeter_pr].

The protocol used on top of RS485 is Modbus-RTU with 8N1 parity and with this code is acting as a `master` and the power meter as `master`.

* `app_modbus.c`: ModBus RTU code
* **`include/cid_tables.h`: Definitions of the Modbus registers for the
several power meters supported**
* `app_rmaker.c`: RainMaker setup for parameters and updates.
* `app_time.c`: PVoutput.org time and date formatting for watts submission.
* `app_rgbled.c`: Nothing to see here, move along XD
* `platformio.ini`: Embeeded certs for RainMaker and other flashing/building goodies.

## 🏗️ Building

As usual with `esp-idf`, you should consult the official [ESP-IDF](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/get-started/index.html) docs as the following is tailored to my personal dev environment and paths:

```sh
conda activate esp
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export.sh
idf.py build flash monitor
```

So this is just a self-reminder, YMMV wildly ;)

## ✋ How can you contribute?

1. Review your own power meter's manual and find the register(s) listing.
1. Submit a pullrequest with a CID table for your meter (**see include/cid_tables.h**)
1. Small and sweet [code reviews and pull requests](https://github.com/brainstorm/esp-modbus-power-meter/pull/2).

## 🌀 Random notes

There are a few vague, vestigial references online about this power meter:

1. There's a [youtube][youtube_usage] video showing the default setup
password and some basic usage/configuration as well as a full [teardown video][yigedianqi_teardown]
1. A possible company spinoff, [from yiGedianqi to yiHedianqi][possible_company_spinoff]?
1. Several [Amazon customers rating this meter][amazon_power_meter_ratings] and pointing out that it only comes with a chinese manual (true story).
1. [A similar project, including Grafana, RPi and other power meters supported.][guillermo_electrico]


[youtube_usage]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=22_Wp99j8_U
[possible_company_spinoff]: http://www.yihedianqi.com/
[amazon_power_meter_ratings]: https://www.amazon.com/3-Phase-Electric-Voltage-Multifunction-Frequency/dp/B078NRNM37
[emodbus_hardware_discussion]: https://github.com/eModbus/eModbus/discussions/166
[rainmaker]: https://rainmaker.espressif.com
[emodbus]: https://emodbus.github.io
[emodbus_hardware_example]: https://github.com/eModbus/eModbus/discussions/112#discussion-3650333
[ttl_level_converter]: https://hackaday.com/2016/12/05/taking-it-to-another-level-making-3-3v-and-5v-logic-communicate-with-level-shifters/
[redepin]: https://github.com/eModbus/eModbus/blob/2c740aa0960328fb0851ab0ff771236b14ed7838/examples/RTU04example/main.cpp#L21
[auto_rede]: https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-reference/peripherals/uart.html#circuit-c-auto-switching-transmitter-receiver
[guillermo_electrico]: https://github.com/GuillermoElectrico/energy-meter-logger
[pvoutput]: https://pvoutput.org/
[espressif_rainmaker_powermeter_pr]: https://github.com/espressif/esp-rainmaker/pull/121
[linksprite_rs485_shield]: https://www.electan.com/rs485-shield-amp-4078-en.html
[MAX481]: https://github.com/brainstorm/yigedianqi-modbus/blob/master/docs/max481csa.pdf
[linksprite_rs485_shield_schematic]:  https://github.com/brainstorm/yigedianqi-modbus/blob/master/docs/linksprite_shield_datasheet.pdf

Commit message:

Refresh common partition errors and missing esp-insights stuff, etc... all idf.py menuconfig related after a big esp-idf upgrade

README.md, after:

# ⚡ ModBus (unofficial) Espressif support for power meters

This repo details how to use a [Saola-1 ESP32S2 board](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32s2/hw-reference/esp32s2/user-guide-saola-1-v1.2.html) coupled with [a RS485 transceiver from
LinkSprite][linksprite_rs485_shield] and connect it to Espressif's IoT cloud platform: [RainMaker][rainmaker].

Also, there's support for [PVoutput.org][pvoutput] graphs since my meter
is coupled to three 500W solar panels (one per phase) equipped with APC
microinverters.

![power_meter_front](./img/yigedianqi_power_meter_front.png)
![supported_power_meters](./img/menuconfig_power_meters.png)

There are several branches, all of them with custom setups that work
with PlatformIO IDE with varying degrees of success:

## 🎋 Branches

* master: FreeModbus from ESP-IDF framework with PVoutput.org and RainMaker support.
* emodbus: [eModbus][emodbus] with Arduino, first time I got the Modbus holding registers listed thanks to [this eModbus discussion thread][emodbus_hardware_discussion].
* arduino-rainmaker: Same as emodbus, but trying to mix in RainMaker,
ultimately switching to ESP-IDF (on `master`) after realising that
[Arduino support for RainMaker has some rough edges at the time of
writing this](https://esp32.com/viewtopic.php?f=41&t=26552).

## 🤖 Hardware setup

The hardware setup is very similar to [this eModbus hardware example thread][emodbus_hardware_example] with a couple of notable differences:

1) The use of a [ttl level converter][ttl_level_converter] between the
[`MAX481CSA` RS485 (5V level)][MAX481] transceiver and the Espressif board (which is 3.3V level).
2) RE/DE circuitry is handled by the LinkSprite shield instead of [via
software with `REDEPIN`][redepin]. This is because [the shield has a
transistor-based automatic switching between transmitting and
receiving][auto_rede], see the schematic in
[docs/linksprite_shield_datasheet.pdf][linksprite_rs485_shield_schematic]

Here's a picture at some of the hardware specs from the power meter:

![power_meter_specs](./img/yigedianqi_power_meter_specs.png)

## 🖥️ Code structure

Don't forget to clone it like this, otherwise the RainMaker submodules
will not be pulled and the code will not compile:

```
git clone --recursive
https://github.com/brainstorm/esp-modbus-power-meter/
```

[When and if Espressif merges my RainMaker power metering PR, I'll
repoint those submodules away from my
fork][espressif_rainmaker_powermeter_pr].

The protocol used on top of RS485 is Modbus-RTU with 8N1 parity and with this code is acting as a `master` and the power meter as `master`.

* `app_modbus.c`: ModBus RTU code
* **`include/cid_tables.h`: Definitions of the Modbus registers for the
several power meters supported**
* `app_rmaker.c`: RainMaker setup for parameters and updates.
* `app_time.c`: PVoutput.org time and date formatting for watts submission.
* `app_rgbled.c`: Nothing to see here, move along XD
* `platformio.ini`: Embeeded certs for RainMaker and other flashing/building goodies.

## 🏗️ Building and provisioning

As usual with `esp-idf`, you should consult the official [ESP-IDF](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/get-started/index.html) docs as the following is tailored to my personal dev environment and paths:

```sh
conda activate esp
. $HOME/esp/esp-idf/export.sh
idf.py menuconfig build flash monitor
```

Make sure that menuconfig has those enabled as sometimes the build system forgets:

1. Custom partition table read from `partitions.csv`
2. esp-insights enabled.

To re-provision RainMaker you'd need to kill the device's memory entirely and start over on your phone with:

```sh
idf.py erase-flash
```

So this is just a self-reminder, YMMV wildly ;)

## ✋ How can you contribute?

1. Review your own power meter's manual and find the register(s) listing.
1. Submit a pullrequest with a CID table for your meter (**see include/cid_tables.h**)
1. Small and sweet [code reviews and pull requests](https://github.com/brainstorm/esp-modbus-power-meter/pull/2).

## 🌀 Random notes

There are a few vague, vestigial references online about this power meter:

1. There's a [youtube][youtube_usage] video showing the default setup
password and some basic usage/configuration as well as a full [teardown video][yigedianqi_teardown]
1. A possible company spinoff, [from yiGedianqi to yiHedianqi][possible_company_spinoff]?
1. Several [Amazon customers rating this meter][amazon_power_meter_ratings] and pointing out that it only comes with a chinese manual (true story).
1. [A similar project, including Grafana, RPi and other power meters supported.][guillermo_electrico]


[youtube_usage]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=22_Wp99j8_U
[possible_company_spinoff]: http://www.yihedianqi.com/
[amazon_power_meter_ratings]: https://www.amazon.com/3-Phase-Electric-Voltage-Multifunction-Frequency/dp/B078NRNM37
[emodbus_hardware_discussion]: https://github.com/eModbus/eModbus/discussions/166
[rainmaker]: https://rainmaker.espressif.com
[emodbus]: https://emodbus.github.io
[emodbus_hardware_example]: https://github.com/eModbus/eModbus/discussions/112#discussion-3650333
[ttl_level_converter]: https://hackaday.com/2016/12/05/taking-it-to-another-level-making-3-3v-and-5v-logic-communicate-with-level-shifters/
[redepin]: https://github.com/eModbus/eModbus/blob/2c740aa0960328fb0851ab0ff771236b14ed7838/examples/RTU04example/main.cpp#L21
[auto_rede]: https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-reference/peripherals/uart.html#circuit-c-auto-switching-transmitter-receiver
[guillermo_electrico]: https://github.com/GuillermoElectrico/energy-meter-logger
[pvoutput]: https://pvoutput.org/
[espressif_rainmaker_powermeter_pr]: https://github.com/espressif/esp-rainmaker/pull/121
[linksprite_rs485_shield]: https://www.electan.com/rs485-shield-amp-4078-en.html
[MAX481]: https://github.com/brainstorm/yigedianqi-modbus/blob/master/docs/max481csa.pdf
[linksprite_rs485_shield_schematic]:  https://github.com/brainstorm/yigedianqi-modbus/blob/master/docs/linksprite_shield_datasheet.pdf
